# GDP Growth and Income Inequality Analysis
This project analyses the relationship between economic growth and income inequality across countries using data from the World Bank World Development Indicators.

Using Python-based data analysis tools, the project cleans, merges, and analyses multiple economic indicators to explore whether higher GDP growth is associated with changes in income inequality.

The analysis includes correlation anlysis, cross-country comparisons, and multiple visualisations to identify economic patterns.

## Dataset
The analysis uses data from the World Bank World Development Indicators dataset.

The following indicators were selected:
- GDP growth (annual %) - measures the rate of economic expansion
- GDP per capita (current US$) - used to classify countries by level of development
- Population, total - included for contextual economic scale
- Gini index - measures income inequality within a country

The dataset was cleaned and reshaped from wide format into a long format to allow easier analysis and merging indicators.

## Methodology
The analysis was conducted using Python, primarily with the pandas,matplotlib, and seaborn libraries.

The workflow followed these steps:
1. Data Cleaning
   - Reshaped the dataset from wide format to long format.
   - Extracted year values from column names.
   - Converted values to numeric format.
   - Removed missing values.

2. Data Integration
   - Individual indicators were seperated into datasets.
   - GDP growth,Gini index,GDP per capita, and population were merged using:
        - Country Name
        - Country Code
        - Year

3. Country Classification
   - Countries were classified into two groups:
        - Developed economies (GDP per capita > $20,000)
        - Developing economies (GDP per capita ≤ $20,000)

4. Correlation Analysis
   - The relationship between GDP growth and inequality was measured using the Pearson correlation coefficient.

5. Visualisation
   - Several charts were created to explore patterns in the data:
      - GDP growth vs inequality scatterplot 
      charts/gdp_vs_inequality.png

      - Correlation heatmap
      charts/correlation_heatmap.png

      - Global inequality trend
      charts/global_inequality_trend.png

      - Growth comparison between developed and developing economies
      charts/growth_comaparison.png

      - Inequality trends by development level
      charts/inequality_by_country_type.png

      - Kuznets Curve test (GDP per capita vs inequality)
      charts/kuznets_curve_test.png

## Project Structure
```
GDP-inequality-analysis_portfolio/
│
├── charts/
│ ├── correlation_heatmap.png
│ ├── gdp_vs_inequality.png
│ ├── global_inequality_trend.png
│ ├── growth_comparison.png
| ├── inequality_by_country_type.png
│ └── kuznets_curve_test.png
|
├── data/
│ ├── cleaned_data.csv
│ └── P_Data_Extract_From_World_Development_Indicators.xlsx
│
├── scripts/
│ ├── analysis.py
│ └── data_cleaning.py
│
├── README.md
└── requirements.txt
```

### Folder Description
charts/
All visualizations generated during the analysis process.

data/
Contains the raw dataset downloaded from the World Bank and the processed datasets used for analysis.

scripts/
Python scripts used to clean the data and perform the economic analysis.

requirements.txt
List of Python libraries required to run the project.

README.md
Documentation describing the project, methodology, and findings.

## Technologies Used
The analysis was conducted using the following tools and libraries:

**Programming Languages**
- Python

**Libraries**
- pandas - data cleaning and manipulation
- numpy - numerical operations
- matplotlib - data visualisations
- seaborn - statistical visualisation

Tools
- Visual Studio Code - development environment
- Git & GitHub - version control and project hosting

Dataset Source
- World Bank World Development Indicators 

## How to Run the Project
Follow the steps below to reproduce the analysis and generate the charts.

1. Clone the Repository

git clone https://github.com/aiswarialajan124-png/DataAnalytics_Portfolios.git

2. Install Required Libraries
Install the required Python packages using:
pip install -r requirements.txt

3. Run the Data Cleaning Script
This script cleans and reshapes the original dataset and saves the processed data.

python scripts/data_cleaning.py

It will generate:
data/cleaned_data.csv

4. Run the Analysis Script
The analysis script merges the economic indicators, performs correlation analysis, and generate visualisations.
python scripts/analysis.py

5. View the Charts
All charts generated by the analysis was saved in the charts/ folder.

The charts output include:
   - GDP growth vs Inequality scatterplot
   - Correlation heatmap
   - Global inequality trends
   - Growth comparison between developed and developing econimies
   - Kuznets curve test

## Key Findings
- Weak relationship between GDP growth and income inequality

  - The scatterplot comparing GDP growth and the Gini index shows a weak positive relationship between economic growth and income inequality. The calculated correlation coefficient is approximately 0.08, indicating that higher GDP growth does not strongly correspond to changes in inequality across countries. The wide dispersion of points suggestS that economic growth alone is not a strong predictor of inequality outcomes.

- Higher income countries tend to have lower inequality

   - The correlation heatmap shows a moderate negative correlation (-0.38) between GDP per capita and Gini index. This suggests that countries with higher income levels tend to experience lower levels of income inequality on avaerge.

- Global inequality has gradually declined over time

    - The global inequality trend chart shows that the average Gini index has generally decreased from 2000s to the early 2020s. Although there are fluctuations across years, the overall trend sugests a gradual reduction in average global income inequality during the obesered period.

- Developing countries exhibit higher and more variable inequality

    - The comparison of inequality trends between developed and developing countries show that developing economies consistently have higher average Gini index values. Additionally, inequality levels in developing economies fluctuate more over time, indicating greater variability compared with developed countries.

- GDP growth distributions differ beteween developed and developing economies

    - The boxplot comparing GDP growth shows that developing countries tend ot experience slightly higher median growth rates and a wider spread of growth outcomes. In contrast, developed countries show lower and more stable growth distributions. This reflects typical macroeconomic patterns where emerging economies ofter grow faster but experience greater volatility.

- Evidence consistent with the Kuznets curve hypothesis 
   
    -The scatterplot examining the relationship between GDP per capita and income inequality shows a curved (U-shaped) trend. At lower levels of income, inequality tends to decrease as GDP per capita increases. However, at higher income levels, inequality begins to increase slightly again.

    This pattern is broadly consistent in the Kuznets curve hypothesis,whih proposes that inequality initially rises during early stages of economic development and later declines as economies become more developed. While the pattern is not perfectly symmetrical, the fitted curve suggests a non-linear relationship between economic development and income inequality.